# On the Microscopical Structure of Meteorites.

## By H. C. Sorby, F. R. S., _etc._

### Recieved June 7, 1864.

For some time past I have endeavoured to apply to the study of meteorites the principles I have made use of in the investigation of terrestrial rocks, as described in my various papers, and especially in that on the microscopical structure of crystals (Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. 1858, vol. 14. p. 453). I therein showed that the presence in crystals of "fluid-, glass-, stone-, or gas-cavities" enables us to determine in a very satisfactory manner under what conditions the crystals were formed. There are also other methods of inquiry still requiring much investigation, and a number of experiments must be made which will occupy much time; yet, not wishing to postpone the publication of certain facts, I purpose now to give a short account of them, to be extended and completed on a subsequent occasion.*

*) The names given thus (Stannern) indicate what meteorites I more particularly refer to in proof of the various facts previously stated.

In the first place it is important to remark that the olivine of meteorites contains most excellent "glass-cavities," similar to those in the olivine of lavas, thus proving that the material was at one time in a state of igneous fusion. The olivine also contains "gas-cavities," like those so common in volcanic minerals, thus indicating the presence of some gas or vapour (Assun, Parnallee). To see these cavities distinctly, a carefully prepared thin section and a magnifying power of several hundreds are required. The vitreous substance found in the cavities is also met with outside and amongst the crystals, in such a manner as to show that it is the uncrystalline residue of the material in which they were formed (Mezö-Madaras, Parnallee). It is of a claret or brownish colour, and possesses the characteristic structure and optical properties of artificial glasses. Some isolated portions of meteorites have also a structure very similar to that of stony lavas, where the shape and mutual relations of the crystals to each other prove that they were formed _in situ_, on solidification. Possibly some entire meteorites should be considered to possess this peculiarity (Stannern, New Concord), but the evidence is by no means conclusive, and what crystallization has taken place _in situ_ may have been a secondary result; whilst in others the constituent particles have all the characters of broken fragments (L'Aigle). This sometimes gives rise to a structure remarkably like that of consolidated volcanic ashes, so much, indeed, that I have specimens which, at first sight, might readily be mistaken for sections of meteorites. It would therefore appear that, after the material of the meteorites was melted, a considerable portion was broken up into small fragments, subsequently collected together, and more or less consolidated by mechanical and chemical actions, amongst which must be classed a segregation of iron, either in the metallic state or in combination with other substances. Apparently this breaking up occurred in some cases when the melted matter had become crystalline, but in others the forms of the particles lead me to conclude that it was broken up into detached globules whilst still metled (Mezö-Madaras, Parnallee). This seems to have been the origin of some of the round grains met with in meteorites; for they occasionally still contain a considerable amount of glass, and the crystals which have been formed in it are arranged in groups, radiating from one or more points on the external surface, in such a manner as to indicate that they were developed after the fragments had acquired their present spheroidal shape (Assun, _etc._). In this they differ most characteristically from the general type of concretionary globules found in terrestrial rocks, in which they radiate from the centre; the only case that I know at all analogous being that of certain oolitic grains in the Kelloways rock at Scarborough, which have undergone a secondary crystallization. These facts are all quite independent of the fused black crust.

Some of the minerals in meteorites, usually considered to be the same as those in volcanic rocks, have yet very characteristic differences in structure (Stannern), which I shall describe at greater length on a future occasion. I will then also give a full account of the microscopical structure of meteoric iron as comparaed with that produced by various artificial processes, showing that under certain conditions the latter may be obtained so as to resemble very closely some varieties of meteoric origin (Newstead, _etc._).

There are thus certain peculiarities in physical structure which connect meteorites with volcanic rocks, and at the same time others in which they differ most characteristically, --- facts which I think must be borne in mind, not only in forming a conclusion as to the origin of meteorites, but also in attempting to explain volcanic action in general. The discussion of such questions, however, should, I think, be deferred until a more complete account can be given of all the data on which these conclusions are founded.
