# On the Physical History of Meteorites.

## By H. C. Sorby, F. R. S.

Though I am most willing to admit that much remains to be learned before we can look upon the following theory as anything more than provisional, yet at all events it serves to unite a great number of facts, and is not opposed to any with which I am now acquainted. I shall describe the facts and discuss the objections to this and other theories in a communication to the Royal Society.

As shown in my paper in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society,' (13. 333), there is good proof of the material of meteorites having been to some extent fused, and in the state of minute detachted particles. I had also met with facts which seemed to show that some portions had condensed from a state of vapour; and I expected that it would be requisite to adopt a modified nebular hypothesis, but hesitated until I had obtained more satisfactory evidence. The character of the constituent particles of meteorites and their general microscopical structure differ so much from what is seen in terrestrial volcanic rocks, that it appears to me extremely improbable that they were ever portions of the moon, or of a planet, which differed from a large meteorite in having been the seat of a more or less modified volcanic action. A most careful study of their microscopical structure leads me to conclude that their constituents were originally at such a high temperature that they were in a state of vapour, like that in which many now occur in the atmosphere of the sun, as proved by the black lines in the solar spectrum. On cooling, this vapour condensed into a sort of cometary cloud, formed of small crystals and minute drops of melted stony matter, which afterwards became more or less devitrified and crystalline. This cloud was in a state of great commotion, and the particles moving with great velocity were often broken by collision. After collecting together to form larger masses, heat, generated by mutual impact, or that existing in other parts of space through which they moved, gave rise to a variable amount of metamorphism. In some few cases, when the whole mass was fused, all evidence of a previous history has been obliterated; and on solidification a structure has been produced quite similar to that of terrestrial volcanic rocks. Such metamorphosed or fused masses were sometimes more or less completely broken up by violent collision, and the fragments again collected together and solidified. Whilst these changes were taking place, various metallic compounds of iron were so introduced as to indicate that they still existed in free space in the shape of vapour, and condensed amongst the previously formed particles of the meteorites. At all events, the relative amount of the metallic constituents appears to have increased with the lapse of time, and they often crystallized under conditions differing entirely from those which occurred when mixed metallic and stony materials were metamorphosed, or solidified from a state of igneous fusion in such small masses that the force of gravitation was too weak to separate the constituents, although they differ so much in specific gravity. (Report of Brit. Assoc. 1864) Possibly, however, some meteoric irons have been produced in this manner by the occurrence of such a separation. The hydro-carbons with which some few meteorites are impregnated, may have condensed from a state of vapour at a relatively late period.

I therefore conclude provisionally that meteorites are records of the existence in planetary space of physical conditions more or less similar to those now confined to the immediate neighbourhood of the sun, at a period indefinitely more remote than that of the occurrence of any of the facts revealed to us by the study of Geology --- at a period which might, in fact, be called _pre-terrestrial_.

Broomfield, Sheffield: July 1865.
  
