# On the Conclusion to be deduced from the Physical Structure of some Meteorites.

## By H. C. Sorby, F. R. S., F. G. S.

### 1864.

The microscopical study of thin sections of meteorites had led the author to conclude that their earliest condition of which we have evidence was that of igneous fusion, as indicated by the crystals of olivine containing 'glass-cavities,' like those characteristic of the minerals in terrestrial volcanic rocks. (See Quart. Jour. Geol. Soc., vol. 14. p. 453; and Proceed. Roy. Soc., vol. 13. p. 333) There are, however, some meteorites, of which the 'Pallas Iron' may be taken as the type, consisting of a mixture of iron and olivine; and, if these were melted artificially, there can be no doubt, that, the iron being so much more dense would almost immediately sink to the bottom, and the olivine would rise to the top, like the slag in an iron-furnace. This at first sight appears to be strongly opposed to the supposition of igneous fusion; but the author contended that, since the force which would tend to separate the iron and olivine would vary with the force of gravitation, whilst the resistance to separation would be chiefly cohesion almost independent of it, if the fusion had taken place where the force of gravitation was very small, the iron and olivine might have remained fused and mixed together long enough to allow of slow crystallization. Hence he argued that such meteorites furnish us with physical evidence of having been formed where the force of gravitation was much smaller than on our globe, either near the surface of a very small planetary body, or towards the centre of a larger, which has since been broken into fragments.
